---
ID: 420
post_title: About Diabetes
author: kate
post_date: 2012-12-05 21:15:31
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: >
  http://www.biking2paradise.com/diabetes/about-diabetes/
published: true
aptools_archive_link:
  - "-1"
---
I am not a doctor and the anecdotes and information shared within are not to be construed as medical advice. Should you have any questions regarding your specific medical conditions, please consult with a qualified physician. **My Story: ** At the start of the 1996 school year, when I was in 8th grade, I remember going to the bathroom between every class (roughly once an hour, everyday, all day long) and waking up 3-4 times/night to go to the bathroom. Coupled with this, I was drinking excessive amounts of water to replace the fluids I was losing. I was also eating an extraordinary amount of food -- more than the average teenage boy. I would eat a large breakfast in the morning, and for lunch I would eat around twice the amount I ate the year before. After school I would eat a dinner-sized afternoon snack, dinner and a snack before bed. Despite this, I lost 30 pounds off my 150 pound frame (down to 120 pounds). My mood was irritable, spacey and tired. I would often sleep during class and when I got home after school. During this time, my mom was concerned about my health and for some reason, thought it necessary to trick me into going to the doctor. On Friday January 31st, I was supposed to go to dinner and bowling with friends, but my mom told me I first had to go to the doctor for a quick test. Because the doctors office was closed at 6pm on a Friday, my mom took me to the emergency room at the University of Kentucky Medical Center (UKMC). There I was admitted for the weekend and diagnosed with type 1 diabetes mellitus. I was born with a genetic pre-disposition for diabetes, but it wasn't until an "environmental trigger" occurred that my immune system started attacking my beta cells. The attack happened over a period of 6-8 months, leaving me with insufficient beta cells to produce the required amounts insulin. My doctors suspect that an odd flu-like illness during the summer before I was diagnosed (summer of 1996) that lasted 4-5 days was the environmental trigger. I was very fortunate to be a patient at the UKMC's endocrinology clinic. During the 2 1/2 days I spent at UKMC, the team of doctors, registered nurses, nutritionists and diabetes educators taught me quite a bit about diabetes and how to manage it. Even though at the time it was a new treatment technique, I quickly began intensive diabetes treatment (testing my blood sugar 4-6 times a day and taking insulin shots 4 times a day). This allowed me to control my diabetes and ultimately allowed me to consistently control my blood sugar at normal levels and normal HbA1c (hemoglobin A1c http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/hba1c). Normal blood sugar levels and normal HbA1c numbers are associated with a significantly reduced risk of longterm complications from diabetes. I hope to increase awareness about diabetes and share my experiences as a person with diabetes. Diabetes can feel like an isolating disease, but it doesn't have to be. By blogging about my adventure, and how I deal with my disease on a daily basis, I want to share with the larger diabetic community that my diabetes does not limit the fulfillment of my dreams. **Diabetes Mellitus, or simply diabetes:** Diabetes is a disease where the body is cannot properly managed blood sugar by itself. This is caused either because the body does not produce insulin or because cells do not respond to the insulin produced. Not managing blood sugar properly can result in either hyperglycemia (high blood sugar) or hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). There are 3 main types of diabetes mellitus: type 1 DM, type 2 DM, and gestational diabetes. The onset of type 1 diabetes is unrelated to lifestyle, while type 2 diabetes is due primarily to lifestyle factors and genetics. **Type 1 Diabetes:** This is when the body does not produce sufficient insulin for its needs and requires the patient to supplement with external insulin. Because insulin is broken down by the stomach (meaning it cannot be taken orally), insulin must be injected subcutaneously (below your skin). Type 1 diabetes most often presents itself in childhood, and was previously called juvenile diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disorder (unlike type 2 and gestational). Normally this means that at some point during childhood, the body's autoimmune system perceives the beta cells in the pancreas (the cells that produce insulin) as a foreign body. The autoimmune system begins to attack the beta cells and destroy them until they cannot produce enough insulin for the body's needs. A chronic side effect of undiagnosed type 1 diabetes is weight loss because the body can't get energy from metabolizing sugar, leading it to metabolizes fat. So far, there is no cure for type 1 diabetes. **Type 2 Diabetes:** This is by far the more prevalent type of diabetes in America (roughly 90%) and is not an autoimmune disorder. Type 2 is caused by insulin resistance and occasionally accompanied by absolute insulin deficiency/lack of insulin production. The bodies of type 2 diabetics normally produce enough insulin for their needs, but the individual cells in the body are resistant to insulin. This means the efficiency is lowered as the insulin does not enter the cell. This causes chronic high blood sugar as the body's cells can't take up the insulin, meaning it doesn't breakdown the glucose, and the glucose is pushed back out into the bloodstream with no where to go. Type 2 used to be referred to as adult-onset diabetes because it occurred in adults. More and more overweight children are now developing this type of diabetes. **Gestational Diabetes:** This occurs when pregnant women without a previous diagnosis of diabetes develop a high blood glucose level. This normally improves or goes away after childbirth. **Blood sugar:** This measures the amount of sugar in the blood. In the US its measured in milligrams per deciliter, in the rest of the world its measured in mmol/L. Your body needs a constant level of sugar in the blood stream at all times to function properly. Properly controlling blood sugar is the main challenge to diabetics. Its helpful to imagine sugar as honey in the bloodstream; it sticks to things. **High blood sugar:** Pre-meal high blood sugar would above 150+ mg/dL. A post-meal high blood sugar is 200+. When there is too much sugar in the blood, it sticks to everything: blood vessel walls, nerve endings. Chronic complications of prolonged high blood sugar are the loss of feeling (sugar coats the nerve endings) and diabetic retinophaty (where the blood vessels in the retina are blocked by sugar buildup, so blood doesn't flow through and you cannot see). The major long-term complications relate to damage to the blood vessels. Diabetes doubles the risk of cardiovascular disease, it increases the risk of stroke and vascular disease. It can lead to chronic kidney disease. Diabetic neuropathy is the impact of diabetes to the nerves, leading to numbness/tingling and pain in the extremities (most commonly the feet) and contributes to diabetes-related foot problems. Acute problems include increased urination, thirst, and hunger. The kidneys attempt to remove excess glucose from the bloodstream, resulting in increased urination. When the kidneys remove the sugar, it removes the water with it (remember, sugar is sticky, so it pulls the water with it). Increased thirst is caused by the same kidney function; pulling water out of the bloodstream. Increased hunger is caused because the body is not metabolizing the glucose into energy. Your body, in need of energy, turns on the signal for hunger. **Low blood sugar:** Low blood sugar would be under 70 mg/dL. When there is too little sugar in the blood, the body has trouble functioning because there is not enough energy. This is an acute problem (in comparison to prolonged high blood sugar). Complications include loss of consciousness, seizures and death. For me, it is hard to see things because my eyes have trouble focusing on individual items (even though I can still somethings). My mental state is unfocused and confused. I start sweating. **Insulin/Glucose relationship:** Insulin is a hormone produced by the beta cells of the pancreas and is central to regulation of carbohydrate and fat metabolism in the body. The presence of insulin in the bloodstream causes the liver, skeletal muscles and fat tissue to take up glucose from the blood. In a person without diabetes, the body produces just enough insulin to regulate the current amount of glucose in the blood. Glucose is a base form of sugar and the predominant carbohydrate fuel source for the body. Other sugars such as fructose and lactose are all converted to glucose by the body. If there is not sufficient insulin for the amount of glucose in the blood stream, this results in high blood sugar. The body has several acute and chronic side effects.  