---
ID: 319
post_title: 'Bad Scam Emeishan &#8211; Updated with Video'
author: Charlie
post_date: 2012-11-28 13:36:58
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: >
  http://www.biking2paradise.com/2012/11/28/bad-bad-emeishan/
published: true
---
The long delayed post -- Bad Scam Emeishan -- is finally here. I like humming the tune of '<a title="Bad bad leroy brown on youtube" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QvwDohEEQ1E" target="_blank">bad bad leroy brown</a>, the baddest man in the whole damn town' to the title of this blog. Vital Stats: Hours on a bus to go up and down the mountain: 4+ Monkey Attacks: 1 for Kate, 10+ for strangers This blog post is brought to you by: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JOafm5PdSQ&feature=plcp Guidebooks and online information promised us a mountain wonderland, complete with monkeys and amazing vistas. Instead, what we found were rather nondescript villages on a mountain road with exceedingly high prices to do just about anything. It seemed like a government official (let's call him Comrade Fu) looked at the mountain road and thought, "Hey, if I put a gate at the bottom of this, I could charge people to come up a road they used to drive up for free." This suggestion was warmly welcomed by his party superior, Comrade Yang, who figured out he could skim some money off the top. Comrade Yang moved his friends and family to the mountain and had them set up restaurants and hotels (not worrying that they had no experience in these lines of businesses) and told them to charge at least 4 times what they were originally thinking. This worked out well for the two officials, but they knew the park had much more untapped potential. Comrade Yang asked his uncle Huang -- a well known business man in the area -- how to make even more money. Uncle Huang suggested the park stop salting the icy steps in the park ('hiking' in China is more like walking up a long series of steps than walking on a mountain path). At first, Comrade Yang did not understand. If they didn't salt the steps, they would be icy and unsafe, and many people would fall and hurt themselves. Clever Uncle Huang explained that icy steps were another opportunity to sell things; they could sell socks to put on the outside of people's shoes and convince them that these socks helped with grip. They could rent out boots for exorbitant amounts. They could hire migrant workers to carry people up on chairs. And finally, they could hike up the price of the chair lifts, because city-folk and old people would be especially nervous about breaking their legs/arms in such a remote area with backwards medical care. Next Uncle Huang consulted his wife, a cunning woman who had all but taken over the towns illegal DVD and Prada purse trade. His wife, Ms. Sun, heard about the monkeys on the mountain and started visiting them daily to feed them. When Uncle Huang heard about this, he was furious. How could such a cunning woman waste their money on giving wild monkeys food? But Ms. Sun had a plan. Her grade-school friend Ms. Chen had a small but struggling business of selling coca-colas, waters, and small snacks on the mountain. Ms. Chen was desperately trying to find a way to increase her sales. So day after day, Ms. Sun weaned the monkeys off the food they found in the wild and gave them a taste for human food. She made sure to bring the food in plastic bags and leave it for the monkeys. Eventually, the monkeys learned that plastic bags meant human food and they began attacking passing visitors for their food. Ms. Chen's business quadrupled, even with the 20% cut she gave Ms. Sun. Then Uncle Huang started telling people on the mountain that the monkeys were dangerous and that visitors should take measures to protect themselves. He found some unemployed men on the outskirt of town and had them start collecting sticks that he could sell as a dual-use walking stick/monkey protection. Business started to flourish. One day, a visiting tourist mistook his 100 RMB note for a 10 RMB note and paid 90RMB too much for the bus to the top of the mountain. This gave Comrade Wang an idea; normal bus tickets in China are around 2RMB. The park thought they were scamming people by charging 10 RMB. But why just charge 10 RMB when you could charge 100 RMB? Comrade Wang immediately upped the prices for buses in the park and created a complicated process for buying tickets to different parts of the park. But this wasn't enough. Comrade Wang wanted to make sure people would buy the bus ticket instead of walking (hiking) up the mountain, so he moved the entrance gate down the mountain. This extended the bus trip so that it took at least 2 hours to get to the mid-point of the mountain. By this time, Ms. Sun's niece had just returned from studying abroad in Switzerland, where she found riding gondolas immensely fun. She asked her Aunt Sun if there was any way they could build some gondolas on the mountain. Ms. Sun immediately got to work hiring her cousins construction company (Huanglong Fortuitous & Magical Construction Co Ltd) who built the gondolas in 5 days, and then charged such exorbitant prices that they made back their investment in 3 weeks. One day a monk, who had been living on the mountain all his life, started complaining about how many people were coming to his temple and leaving trash everywhere. Comrade Wang immediately understood the problem; it wasn't too many people, it was that the monk wasn't getting enough of a kick-back. Comrade Wang had become accustomed to his new lifestyle and didn't want to start paying monks from his own pocket, so he charged to get into sights on the mountain (this is after visitors have already paid a hefty entrance fee at the bottom of the park). The monk bought a TV and stopped complaining. Finally Comrade Yang and Fu understood how to run a successful <del>business</del> national park. It was all about getting people into the park with promises of a pristine wilderness (which wasn't there), wild animals (that stole food, so that the visitor would need to buy more), and peace (of which there was none) and then gouging them for all the cash they had on hand. A whole industry was built up around a road on a mountain, and a small town at the base started to flourish. The food became crappy, the beds hard, and the people unhelpful. In the end, Comrade Fu was recognized for his success and made the chief executive of the Shanghai branch of the Bank of China. Comrade Yang found even greater fortune based on his work at Emeishan, replacing the party head in Chongqing with the task to stomp out corruption, but that's a different story all together.... If you do visit Emeishan (which we wouldn't advise -- go to [Jiuzhaigou][1] instead! its still expensive, but so worth it), entrance tickets are 150RMB/person and are good for 2 days (we were told, we didn't go back a 2nd day). Bus tickets to the 'top' of the mountain cost 90RMB/day. Top is rather misleading, since the top is neither the top of where the road goes, or the top of the mountain. But its the farthest the buses seem to go. Buses to this point take 2 hours (yes, 2 hours!). Buses stop running early, I imagine to make you stay at some overpriced hotel on the mountain, even though you've probably already paid for a hotel in town. Gondola rides cost more, I think somewhere around 60-90RMB/person/trip (going up and going down are charged separately . Things inside the park cost more money. We didn't pay for those things, so I can't give you any more information. The monkeys are super aggressive. We originally planned on going to the area with all the monkeys, but found too many for our liking on the regular paths. Food in the small town on the bottom of the mountain was overpriced and liking walking into Silk Market in Beijing. Not fun. Bad Scam Emeishan! Here are the nicer parts in pictures: Emeishan: [nggallery id=12] Hungry Monkeys: [nggallery id=11] Monkeys: [nggallery id=10]

 [1]: http://biking2paradise.com/2012/11/23/big-skies-blue-lakes-jiuzhaigou/ "Big Skies, Blue Lakes: Jiuzhaigou"