---
ID: 471
post_title: >
  Managing diabetes in the first three
  weeks
author: Charlie
post_date: 2012-12-08 21:14:26
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: >
  http://www.biking2paradise.com/2012/12/08/managing-diabetes-in-the-first-three-weeks/
published: true
---
**My Story** I was diagnosed with type I diabetes (aka juvenile diabetes) when I was 15. It was an awkward age to be diagnosed as I was too old for the treatment of the disease to be managed by my parents, but also I was too young to be completely able to manage it by myself. I certainly had the complete support of my parents while learning how to deal with this disease; however, being the youngest of 3 children, I learned, as with many things, to largely figure it out on my own. To this day my mom still occasionally asks me about why I made this or that treatment decision. It takes me a minute to realize that when I was learning about how to test my blood sugar and how to give myself insulin shots, she was mostly an attentive bystander trying to understand what was happening while not getting in the way. I've had diabetes for 15 years (I am 30) and have lived with it through high school varsity soccer, a socially active college life (socially active = "I drank alcohol") and 7+ years living in China. I have passed out from low blood sugar 5 times, most recently 8 years ago (in 2004) and have kept my HbA1c between 5.5 and 6.5 most of my life. I'll explain all these things in later posts, but if you are reading this and have diabetes or have a loved one with diabetes you probably understand. **Why focus on diabetes on our blog?** I never looked at my diabetes as something to stifle me or limit my ability to do anything.  Rather, it was one small (albeit very important) aspect of my health and well being that I had to deal with, unlike my friends and almost everyone else I knew. I went out of my way to understand as much as I could about my disease so I didn't have to worry myself (or my friends/teachers/friends' parents) about it. I am writing these posts to share my experiences with my family and friends, but also to provide anecdotes for other people with diabetes.  I hope that my stories will help encourage people to take an active role in dealing with their diabetes.  My disease has not held me back; I hope my blog will help others realize diabetes shouldn't hold them back either. **Challenges with our bike journey** The year or two prior to setting out on this crazy adventure, I led a very sedentary lifestyle. I worked mostly from home, so my 'morning commute' was approximately 10 steps from the bedroom to the study. While I did have a treadmill in my apartment, try as I might, I still on average only managed a 30 minute run on it once a week. That being said I still maintained good blood sugars and keep my HbA1c below 6.5 Immediately prior to leaving on this trip, my correction factor was 1 unit of bolus insulin for every 25 points over 150 mg/dL and my carb/insulin ratio was 1 unit bolus insulin for every 8 grams of carbs.  For a normal meal I would take 12-15 units of insulin.  I took 25 units of basil insulin before bed.  I use NovoRapid Flexpens for my bolus insulin and Lantus for my basil insulin. One of the biggest challenges has been dealing with the dramatic increase in the amount of exercise and balancing that with my body's insulin usage.  On days where I am on the bicycle for more than an hour (the average time on days we ride has been 2 hours and 49 minutes), I have cut my bolus insulin by 50% and the night before I cut my basil insulin by 40%.  So now the night before we are planning on riding, I will take 15 units of basil and for normal meal I will take 6-8 units.  Pretty dramatic right?! The last time I was exercising this much was in high school when I was playing soccer for Henry Clay in the fall and the Lexington Select leagues in the spring.  Because of the extensive and long-term exercise, the benefits would carry over even on days I didn't exercise.  However with the cycling I guess the exercise isn't extensive enough or we haven't been doing it long enough, so I have found that on days we are not cycling I have to change my insulin usage back to 90-100% of pre-trip levels.